-- Q1. What is a Common Table Expression (CTE), and how does it improve SQL query readability?
-- Answer:
-- A Common Table Expression (CTE) is a temporary result set defined using the WITH clause that can be referenced within a SQL query. 
-- It helps break complex queries into smaller, more manageable parts.
-- syntax:
-- WITH cte_name AS (
--    SELECT column1, column2
--    FROM table_name)
-- SELECT * FROM cte_name;

-- How it improves readability:
-- Simplifies complex queries by dividing them into logical steps
-- Makes SQL code easier to understand and maintain
-- Avoids repeating the same subquery multiple times
-- Improves debugging and testing

Q2. Why are some views updatable while others are read-only? Explain with an example. 
Answer:
A view is a virtual table based on a SQL query. 
Some views are updatable, meaning we can perform INSERT, UPDATE OR DELETE OPERATIONS on them, while others are read-only.

Updatable Views:
A view is updatable when:
1. It is based on a single table
2. It does not contain complex expressions or calculations
3. It does not use GROUP BY, JOIN, DISTINCT, or aggregate functions
Example:
CREATE VIEW view_SimpleProducts AS
SELECT ProductID, ProductName, Price
FROM Products;
This view is updatable because it is based on a single table without any complex operations.

Read-Only Views:
1. It uses JOINs
2. It contains DISTINCT or complex expressions
3. It includes GROUP BY or aggregate functions (SUM, AVG, etc.)
Example:
CREATE VIEW vw_CategorySummary AS
SELECT Category, COUNT(*) AS TotalProducts
FROM Products
GROUP BY Category;
This view is read-only.

CONCLUSION:
Views are updatable only when SQL can clearly map the changes back to the original table. 
Complex queries make this mapping impossible, so such views become read-only.


Q3. What advantages do stored procedures offer compared to writing raw SQL queries repeatedly? 
Answer:
A stored procedure is a precompiled collection of SQL statements stored in the database that can be executed whenever needed.

          -- Advantages of Stored Procedures: --
1. Reusability:
   ~ Stored procedures can be used multiple times without rewriting the same SQL queries
   ~ Reduces duplication of code
2. Better Performance
   ~ Stored procedures are precompiled, so execution is faster
   ~ Reduces query parsing and execution time
3. Improved Security
  ~ Users can be given permission to execute the procedure without accessing the underlying tables
  ~ Helps protect sensitive data
4. Easy Maintenance
  ~ Changes can be made in one place without modifying multiple queries
  ~ Simplifies updates and bug fixes
5. Reduced Network Traffic
  ~ Instead of sending multiple SQL queries, only the procedure call is sent
  ~ Improves efficiency in client-server communication


Q4. What is the purpose of triggers in a database? Mention one use case where a trigger is essential. 
Answer:
A trigger is a special type of stored program in a database that automatically executes in response to 
specific events such as INSERT, UPDATE, or DELETE on a table.
Purpose of Triggers:
  To automate actions when data changes
  To maintain data integrity
  To enforce business rules
  To track or audit changes in a table
Types of Triggers:
  BEFORE Trigger → Executes before the event
  AFTER Trigger → Executes after the event
Example Use Case:
-- Maintaining an audit log of deleted records
    When a record is deleted from a table, a trigger can automatically store 
    that record in an archive table for future reference.

Conclusion:
Triggers help automate important database operations and are essential for tasks 
like auditing, validation, and maintaining consistency.


Q5. Explain the need for data modelling and normalization when designing a database.
Answer:

~Data Modelling:
  Data modelling is the process of designing the structure of a database, including tables, relationships, and constraints.
~Need for Data Modelling:
  Helps in designing a clear database structure
  Defines relationships between different tables
  Ensures efficient data storage and retrieval
  Improves scalability and maintainability

~Normalization:
  Normalization is the process of organizing data in a database to reduce redundancy and improve data integrity.
~Need for Normalization:
  Eliminates duplicate data (redundancy)
  Ensures data consistency
  Prevents anomalies (insert, update, delete issues)
  Makes database more efficient


--Q6. Write a CTE to calculate the total revenue for each product 
--(Revenues = Price × Quantity), and return only products where  revenue > 3000
Answer:

WITH RevenueCTE AS (
    SELECT 
        p.ProductID,
        p.ProductName,
        SUM(p.Price * s.Quantity) AS Revenue
    FROM Products p
    JOIN Sales s 
        ON p.ProductID = s.ProductID
    GROUP BY p.ProductID, p.ProductName
)

SELECT *
FROM RevenueCTE
WHERE Revenue > 3000;







